add mmrm slides for BBS/EFSPI event (#21)
RConsortium/asa-biop-swe-wg: slides/bbs-mmrm/slides.qmd

---
title: "mmrm"
author: "Daniel Sabanes Bove"
institute: (Statistical Engineering,
  Pharma Product Development Data Sciences, 
  Roche)
date: "@BBS/EFSPI workshop 8 Dec 2022"
format: 
  revealjs:
    incremental: true
    logo: sticker-1200.png
    slide-number: c/t
title-slide-attributes: 
  data-background-image: mmrm.png
  data-background-size: 20%
  data-background-opacity: "0.5"
  data-background-position: 80% 10%
---

## Acknowledgments

::: nonincremental
::: columns
::: {.column width="50%"}
Authors:

-   Kevin Kunzmann (Boehringer Ingelheim)
-   Brian Matthew Lang (MSD)
-   Ya Wang (Gilead)
-   Julia Dedic (Roche)
-   Doug Kelkhoff (Roche)
-   Liming Li (Roche)
:::

::: {.column width="50%"}
Thanks to:

-   Ben Bolker (McMaster University)
-   Software Engineering working group (SWE WG)
-   Gonzalo Duran Pacheco (Roche)
-   Craig Gower-Page (Roche)
-   Dinakar Kulkarni (Roche)
-   Davide Garolini (Roche)
:::
:::
:::

## Motivation

-   2 years ago, we thought we had solved the MMRM problem, using `lme4` and `lmerTest`
-   However in March this year, Gonzalo and Julia told us the bad news: this approach failed on their Ophthalmology data sets (slow, did not converge)

> -   `nlme` does not give Satterthwaite adjusted degrees of freedom, and with `emmeans` it is only approximate, also has convergence issues

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `nlme` does not give Satterthwaite adjusted degrees of freedom, has convergence issues, and with `emmeans` it is only approximate
```

reordering lets it read better.

-   Next we tried to extend `glmmTMB` to calculate Satterthwaite adjusted degrees of freedom. But it did not work.

## Idea

> -   Because `glmmTMB` is always using a random effects representation, cannot have a real unstructured model (need to use a trick)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Because `glmmTMB` is always using a random effects representation, we cannot have a real unstructured model (need to use a trick)
```

> -   Because `glmmTMB` is always using a random effects representation, cannot have a real unstructured model (need to use a trick)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Because `glmmTMB` is always using a random effects representation it cannot have a real unstructured model (need to use a trick)
```

-   We only want to fit a fixed effects model with a structured covariance matrix for each subject.

> -   The idea was to use the Template Model Builder (`TMB`) directly - as it is also underlying `glmmTMB` and code exactly the model we want.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   The idea is then to use the Template Model Builder (`TMB`) directly - as it is also underlying `glmmTMB` - but code the exact model we want.
```

> -   Basically we need to write the log-likelihood in `C++` using the `TMB` provided libraries (`Eigen` etc.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   We do this by implementing the log-likelihood in `C++` using the `TMB` provided libraries (`Eigen` etc.)
```

## Advantages of `TMB`

-   Since we use `C++` it is fast (but `Rcpp` could also have been used instead)
-   Automatic differentiation of the log-likelihood as a function of the variance parameters

> -   Therefore we get the gradient and Hessian exactly and without additional coding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   We get the gradient and Hessian exactly and without additional coding
```

-   This can be used from the R side with the `TMB` interface and plugged into optimization functions

## Cross-industry collaboration

-   We created an initial prototype quickly and open sourced it on [github.com/openpharma/mmrm](https://github.com/openpharma/mmrm)

> -   In parallel we assembled multiple other companies - many of them had been struggling to implement MMRM in R reliably too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   In parallel we assembled multiple other companies - many of them had also struggled to implement MMRM in R.
```

-   This was the start of the Software Engineering working group (SWE WG)
    -   Read more at [rconsortium.github.io/asa-biop-swe-wg](https://rconsortium.github.io/asa-biop-swe-wg)
    -   Official working group of the ASA Biopharmaceutical section

## Features

-   Continuous responses with normal residuals.
-   Marginal linear models (no individual-level random effects).

> -   Covariance structures: Unstructured, Toeplitz, AR1, compound symmetry, ante-dependence and spatial exponential. Allows group specific covariance estimates.

Reviewer: weights?

Author: is below already

-   REML or ML estimation, weighted observations.

> -   `emmeans` package can be used to obtain least square means and test linear contrasts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   The `emmeans` package can be used to obtain least square means and test linear contrasts.
```
either "the emmeans package can..." or "emmeans can..."

-   Satterthwaite adjusted degrees of freedom.

## Getting started

-   `mmrm` is on CRAN. Use this as a starting point:

. . .

```{r, eval = FALSE, echo = TRUE}
install.packages("mmrm")
library(mmrm)
fit <- mmrm(
  formula = FEV1 ~ RACE + SEX + ARMCD * AVISIT + us(AVISIT | USUBJID),
  data = fev_data
)
summary(fit)
library(emmeans)
emmeans(fit, ~ ARMCD | AVISIT)
```

-   Visit [openpharma.github.io/mmrm](https://openpharma.github.io/mmrm/) for detailed docs including vignettes
-   Consider [tern.mmrm](https://insightsengineering.github.io/tern.mmrm/main/) for high-level clinical reporting interface, incl. standard tables and graphs

## Outlook

-   We still have major features on our backlog:
    -   Kenward-Roger (improved variance-covariance matrix, degrees of freedom)
    -   Robust sandwich estimator for covariance matrix (important when not using unstructured covariance)

>     -   Type II and type III Anova tests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   Type II and type III ANOVA tests
```

-   Working on comparison to other implementations

>     -   regarding estimates, computation time, convergence

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -   parameter estimates, computation time, convergence
```
